[Doc] Refactor external arrays (#6065)
taichi-dev/taichi: docs/lang/articles/basic/external.md

# Interacting with External Arrays

This document provides instructions on how to transfer data from external arrays to the Taichi scope and vice versa. For now, the external arrays supported by Taichi are NumPy arrays, PyTorch tensors, and Paddle tensors.

We use NumPy arrays as an example to illustrate the data transfer process because NumPy arrays are the most commonly used external arrays in Taichi. The same steps apply to PyTorch tensors and Paddle tensors.

There are two ways to import a NumPy array `arr` to the Taichi scope:

> - Create a Taichi field `f` whose shape and dtype match the shape and dtype of `arr`, and call the method `f.from_numpy(arr)` to copy the data in `arr` into `f`. This approach is preferred when the original array is visited frequently from elsewhere in the Taichi scope (for example, in the case of texture sampling).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create a Taichi field `f`, whose shape and dtype match the shape and dtype of `arr`, and call `f.from_numpy(arr)` to copy the data in `arr` into `f`. This approach is preferred when the original array is visited frequently from elsewhere in the Taichi scope (for example, in the case of texture sampling).
```

> a. Create a Taichi field `f` whose shape and dtype match the shape and dtype of `arr`, and call the method `f.from_numpy(arr)` to copy the data in `arr` into `f`. This approach is preferred when the original array is visited frequently from elsewhere in the Taichi scope (for example, in the case of texture sampling).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Create a Taichi field `f` whose shape and dtype match the shape and dtype of `arr`, and call the method `f.from_numpy(arr)` to copy the data in `arr` into `f`. This approach is preferred when the original array is visited frequently from elsewhere in the Taichi scope (for example, in the case of texture sampling).
```

> - Pass `arr` as an argument to a kernel or a Taichi function using `ti.types.ndarray()` as the type hint. The argument is passed by reference without creating a copy of `arr`. Thus, any modifications of this argument inside the kernel or Taichi function will also change the original array `arr`. This approach is preferred when the kernel or Taichi function that takes in the argument needs to manipulate the original array (for storage or filtering, for example).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Pass `arr` as an argument to a kernel or a Taichi function using `ti.types.ndarray()` as type hint. The argument is passed by reference without creating a copy of `arr`. Thus, any modification to this argument from inside a kernel or Taichi function also changes the original array `arr`. This approach is preferred when the kernel or Taichi function that takes in the argument needs to process the original array (for storage or filtering, for example).
```
“manipulate" is not as straightforward as "process" IMO.

> b. Pass `arr` as an argument to a kernel or a Taichi function using `ti.types.ndarray()` as the type hint. The argument is passed by reference without creating a copy of `arr`. Thus, any modifications of this argument inside the kernel or Taichi function will also change the original array `arr`. This approach is preferred when the kernel or Taichi function that takes in the argument needs to manipulate the original array (for storage or filtering, for example).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Pass `arr` as an argument to a kernel or a Taichi function using `ti.types.ndarray()` as the type hint. The argument is passed by reference without creating a copy of `arr`. Thus, any modifications of this argument inside the kernel or Taichi function will also change the original array `arr`. This approach is preferred when the kernel or Taichi function that takes in the argument needs to manipulate the original array (for storage or filtering, for example).
```

## Data transfer between NumPy arrays and Taichi fields

To import data from a NumPy array to a Taichi field, first make sure that the field and the array have the same shape:

```python
x = ti.field(float, shape=(3, 3))
a = np.arange(9).reshape(3, 3).astype(np.int32)
x.from_numpy(a)
print(x)
#[[0 1 2]
# [3 4 5]
# [6 7 8]]
```

In the example above, the scalar field `x` and the array `a` have the same shape `(3, 3)`. This operation would fail if their shapes did not match. Shape matching of a vector or matrix field with a NumPy array is slightly different, which will be discussed in a later section.

The field should also have the same dtype as the array; otherwise, an implicit type casting would occur - see [type system](../type_system/type.md).

> Conversely, to export the data in `x` to a NumPy array, call the `to_numpy()` method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conversely, to export the data in `x` to a NumPy array, call `to_numpy()`:
```

```python
arr = x.to_numpy()
#array([[0, 1, 2],
#       [3, 4, 5],
#       [6, 7, 8]], dtype=int32)
```

## Data transfer between PyTorch/Paddle tensors and Taichi fields

> Data transfer between a PyTorch tensor and a Taichi field is similar to the NumPy case above: Replace the `from_numpy()` call with `from_torch()` for data import, and replace `to_numpy()` with `to_torch()` for data export. But note that `to_torch()` requires one more argument `device` for specifying the PyTorch device:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data transfer between a PyTorch tensor and a Taichi field is similar to the NumPy case above: Call `from_torch()` for data import and `to_torch()` for data export. But note that `to_torch()` requires one more argument `device`, which specifies the PyTorch device:
```
I prefer not using "replace" here. These are two different cases.

```python
tensor = x.to_torch(device="cuda:0")
print(tensor.device) # device(type='cuda', index=0)
```

> Likewise for Paddle, you need to specify the device using `paddle.CPUPlace()` or `paddle.CUDAPlace(n)` where `n` is an optional ID set to 0 by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Paddle, you need to specify the device by calling `paddle.CPUPlace()` or `paddle.CUDAPlace(n)`, where `n` is an optional ID set to 0 by default.
```
Paddle is *not* likewise.

    field.from_numpy(array)  # the input array must be of shape (256, 512)
    ```

    An illustration is shown below:

    ```
                                   field.shape[1]=array.shape[1]
                                               (=512)
                                      ┌───────────────────────┐

                                   ┌  ┌───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬───┐  ┐
                                   │  │   │   │   │   │   │   │  │
                                   │  ├───┼───┼───┼───┼───┼───┤  │
    field.shape[0]=array.shape[0]  │  │   │   │   │   │   │   │  │
             (=256)                │  ├───┼───┼───┼───┼───┼───┤  │
                                   │  │   │   │   │   │   │   │  │
                                   └  └───┴───┴───┴───┴───┴───┘  ┘
    ```

- When importing data to or exporting data from an `n`-dimensional vector field, ensure that **the shape of the corresponding NumPy array, PyTorch tensor, or Paddle tensor is set to** `(*field_shape, n)`:

    ```python
    field = ti.Vector.field(3, int, shape=(256, 512))
    field.shape  # (256, 512)
    field.n      # 3

    array = field.to_numpy()
    array.shape  # (256, 512, 3)

>     field.from_numpy(array)  # the input array must be of shape (256, 512, 3)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    field.from_numpy(array)  # the input array must in the shape (256, 512, 3)
```

We use NumPy arrays as an example to illustrate the data transfer process because NumPy arrays are the most commonly used external arrays in Taichi. The same steps apply to PyTorch tensors and Paddle tensors.

There are two ways to import a NumPy array `arr` to the Taichi scope:

a. Create a Taichi field `f` whose shape and dtype match the shape and dtype of `arr`, and call the method `f.from_numpy(arr)` to copy the data in `arr` into `f`. This approach is preferred when the original array is visited frequently from elsewhere in the Taichi scope (for example, in the case of texture sampling).

b. Pass `arr` as an argument to a kernel or a Taichi function using `ti.types.ndarray()` as the type hint. The argument is passed by reference without creating a copy of `arr`. Thus, any modifications of this argument inside the kernel or Taichi function will also change the original array `arr`. This approach is preferred when the kernel or Taichi function that takes in the argument needs to manipulate the original array (for storage or filtering, for example).

> We now explain them in more detail.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

We use NumPy arrays as an example to illustrate the data transfer process because NumPy arrays are the most commonly used external arrays in Taichi. The same steps apply to PyTorch tensors and Paddle tensors.

There are two ways to import a NumPy array `arr` to the Taichi scope:

1. Create a Taichi field `f` whose shape and dtype match the shape and dtype of `arr`, and call the method `f.from_numpy(arr)` to copy the data in `arr` into `f`. This approach is preferred when the original array is visited frequently from elsewhere in the Taichi scope (for example, in the case of texture sampling).

2. Pass `arr` as an argument to a kernel or a Taichi function using `ti.types.ndarray()` as the type hint. The argument is passed by reference without creating a copy of `arr`, and thus any modifications of this argument inside the kernel or Taichi function will also change the original array `arr`. This approach is preferred when the kernel or Taichi function that takes in the argument needs to manipulate the original array (for storage or filtering, for example).

> We now explain them in more details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We now explain them in more detail.
```

## Import and export data between NumPy arrays and Taichi fields

To import data from a NumPy array to a Taichi field, firstly make sure the field and the array have the same shape:

```python
x = ti.field(float, shape=(3, 3))
a = np.arange(9).reshape(3, 3).astype(np.int32)
x.from_numpy(a)
print(x)
#[[0 1 2]
# [3 4 5]
# [6 7 8]]
```

In the above exmaple, the scalar field `x` and the array `a` both have shape `(3, 3)`. You won't be able to perform this operation if their shapes don't match. For vector and matrix fields their shape matching rules with NumPy arrays are a bit subtle and will be discussed in a later section.

The field should also have the same dtype with the array, otherwise an implicit type casting will be performed, see [type system](../type_system/type.md).

> To export the data in `x` to a NumPy array, simply call its `to_numpy()` method:

Author: Yes.

> The field should also have the same dtype with the array; otherwise, an implicit type casting would occur - see [type system](../type_system/type.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The field should also have the same dtype as the array; otherwise, an implicit type casting would occur - see [type system](../type_system/type.md).
```

```python
arr = x.to_numpy()
#array([[0, 1, 2],
#       [3, 4, 5],
#       [6, 7, 8]], dtype=int32)
```

## Import and export data between PyTorch/Paddle tensors and Taichi fields

To import data from a PyTorch tensor, simply replace the `from_numpy()` call by `from_torch()`, and replace `to_numpy()` by `to_torch()` to export data to a PyTorch tensor. But note `to_torch()` requires one more argument here: you need also specify the PyTorch device using the `device` argument:

```python
tensor = x.to_torch(device="cuda:0")
print(tensor.device) # device(type='cuda', index=0)
```

Likewise for Paddle, you need to specify the device by `paddle.CPUPlace()` or `paddle.CUDAPlace(n)` where `n` is an optional ID, the default is 0.

## External array shapes

> As mentioned before, when importing/exporing data between a `ti.field/ti.Vector.field/ti.Matrix` and a NumPy array, you need to make sure the shape of the field matches the corresponding array. The matching rule is summarized below:

Reviewer 3: ti.Matrix.field

    ```python
    field = ti.Vector.field(3, int, shape=(256, 512))
    field.shape  # (256, 512)
    field.n      # 3

    array = field.to_numpy()
    array.shape  # (256, 512, 3)

    field.from_numpy(array)  # the input array must be of shape (256, 512, 3)
    ```

    An illustration is shown below:

    ```
                                     field.shape[1]=array.shape[1]
                                                (=512)
                                     ┌─────────────────────────────┐

                                  ┌  ┌─────────┬─────────┬─────────┐  ┐
                                  │  │[*, *, *]│[*, *, *]│[*, *, *]│  │
                                  │  ├─────────┼─────────┼─────────┤  │
    field.shape[0]=array.shape[0] │  │[*, *, *]│[*, *, *]│[*, *, *]│  │        [*, *, *]
             (=256)               │  ├─────────┼─────────┼─────────┤  │        └───────┘
                                  │  │[*, *, *]│[*, *, *]│[*, *, *]│  │   n=array.shape[2]=3
                                  └  └─────────┴─────────┴─────────┘  ┘
    ```

> - When importing data to or exporting data from an `n`-by-`m` (`n x m`) matrix field,  ensure that **the shape of the corresponding NumPy array, PyTorch tensor, or Paddle Tensor is set to** `(*field_shape, n, m)`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When importing data to or exporting data from an `n`-by-`m` (`n x m`) matrix field,  ensure that **the shape of the corresponding NumPy array, PyTorch tensor, or Paddle tensor is set to** `(*field_shape, n, m)`:
```

    array.shape  # (256, 512, 3, 4)

    field.from_numpy(array)  # the input array must be of shape (256, 512, 3, 4)
    ```

- For struct fields, the external array will be exported as **a dictionary of NumPy arrays, PyTorch tensors or Paddle Tensors** with keys being struct member names and values being struct member arrays. Nested structs will be exported as nested dictionaries:

    ```python
    field = ti.Struct.field({'a': ti.i32, 'b': ti.types.vector(3, float)}, shape=(256, 512))
    field.shape # (256, 512)

    array_dict = field.to_numpy()
    array_dict.keys() # dict_keys(['a', 'b'])
    array_dict['a'].shape # (256, 512)
    array_dict['b'].shape # (256, 512, 3)

    field.from_numpy(array_dict) # the input array must have the same keys as the field
    ```

## Using external arrays as Taichi kernel arguments

You can use type hint `ti.types.ndarray()` to pass external arrays as kernel arguments. For example:

```python {10}
import taichi as ti
import numpy as np
ti.init()

a = np.zeros((5, 5))

@ti.kernel
def test(a: ti.types.ndarray()):
    for i in range(a.shape[0]):
        for j in range(a.shape[1]):
            a[i, j] = i + j

test()
print(a)
```

> Note that elements in an external array must be indexed using a single square bracket. This contrasts with a Taichi vector or matrix field where field and matrix indices are indexed separately:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the elements in an external array must be indexed using a single square bracket. This contrasts with a Taichi vector or matrix field where field members and elements are indexed separately:
```

                                     ┌─────────────────────────────┐

                                  ┌  ┌─────────┬─────────┬─────────┐  ┐
                                  │  │[*, *, *]│[*, *, *]│[*, *, *]│  │
                                  │  ├─────────┼─────────┼─────────┤  │
    field.shape[0]=array.shape[0] │  │[*, *, *]│[*, *, *]│[*, *, *]│  │        [*, *, *]
             (=256)               │  ├─────────┼─────────┼─────────┤  │        └───────┘
                                  │  │[*, *, *]│[*, *, *]│[*, *, *]│  │   n=array.shape[2]=3
                                  └  └─────────┴─────────┴─────────┘  ┘
    ```

- When importing data to or exporting data from an `n`-by-`m` (`n x m`) matrix field,  ensure that **the shape of the corresponding NumPy array, PyTorch tensor, or Paddle tensor is set to** `(*field_shape, n, m)`:

    ```python
    field = ti.Matrix.field(3, 4, ti.i32, shape=(256, 512))
    field.shape  # (256, 512)
    field.n      # 3
    field.m      # 4

    array = field.to_numpy()
    array.shape  # (256, 512, 3, 4)

    field.from_numpy(array)  # the input array must be of shape (256, 512, 3, 4)
    ```

> - When importing data to a struct field, export the data of the corresponding external array as **a dictionary of NumPy arrays, PyTorch tensors, or Paddle Tensors** with keys being struct member names and values being struct member arrays. Nested structs will be exported as nested dictionaries:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When importing data to a struct field, export the data of the corresponding external array as **a dictionary of NumPy arrays, PyTorch tensors, or Paddle tensors** with keys being struct member names and values being struct member arrays. Nested structs are exported as nested dictionaries:
```

    ```python
    field = ti.Struct.field({'a': ti.i32, 'b': ti.types.vector(3, float)}, shape=(256, 512))
    field.shape # (256, 512)

    array_dict = field.to_numpy()
    array_dict.keys() # dict_keys(['a', 'b'])
    array_dict['a'].shape # (256, 512)
    array_dict['b'].shape # (256, 512, 3)

    field.from_numpy(array_dict) # the input array must have the same keys as the field
    ```

## Using external arrays as Taichi kernel arguments

> You can use type hint `ti.types.ndarray()` to pass external arrays as kernel arguments. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use type hint `ti.types.ndarray()` to pass external arrays as kernel arguments. For example:
```

```python {10}
import taichi as ti
import numpy as np
ti.init()

a = np.zeros((5, 5))

@ti.kernel
def test(a: ti.types.ndarray()):

>     for i in range(a.shape[0]):  # parallel for loop!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    for i in range(a.shape[0]):  # a parallel for loop
```

        for j in range(a.shape[1]):
            a[i, j] = i + j

test()
print(a)
```

This is an entry-level example to show you how to call `ti.types.ndarray()`. We now illustrate a more advanced usage of this method.

> Assume that `a` and `b` are both 2D arrays of the same shape and dtype. For each cell `(i, j)` in `a`, we want to calculate the difference between its value and the average of its four neighboring cells while storing the result in the corresponding cell in `b` (we omit the cells that are located on the boundary, i.e. those cells with fewer than four neighbors). This operation is usually denoted as the *discrete Laplace operator*:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Assume that `a` and `b` are both 2D arrays of the same shape and dtype. For each cell `(i, j)` in `a`, we want to calculate the difference between its value and the average of its four neighboring cells while storing the result in the corresponding cell in `b`. In this case, cells on the boundary, i.e., cells with fewer than four neighbors, are ruled out from consideration. This operation is usually denoted as the *discrete Laplace operator*:
```

> Assume that `a` and `b` are both 2D arrays of the same shape and dtype. For each cell `(i, j)` in `a`, we want to calculate the difference between its value and the average of its four neighboring cells while storing the result in the corresponding cell in `b`. In this case, cells on the boundary, i.e., cells with fewer than four neighbors, are ruled out for simplicity. This operation is usually denoted as the *discrete Laplace operator*:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Assume that `a` and `b` are both 2D arrays of the same shape and dtype. For each cell `(i, j)` in `a`, we want to calculate the difference between its value and the average of its four neighboring cells while storing the result in the corresponding cell in `b`. In this case, cells on the boundary, which are cells with fewer than four neighbors, are ruled out for simplicity. This operation is usually denoted as the *discrete Laplace operator*:
```

```
b[i, j] = a[i, j] - (a[i-1, j] + a[i, j-1] + a[i+1, j] + a[i, j+1]) / 4
```

Such an operation is usually very slow even with NumPy's vectorization, as the following code snippet shows:

```python
b[1:-1, 1:-1] += (               a[ :-2, 1:-1] +
                  a[1:-1, :-2]                 + a[1:-1, 2:] +
                                 a[2:  , 1:-1])
```

> But Taichi allows us to meet the same purpose in one parallel `for` loop only:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But Taichi can meet the same purpose in one parallel `for` loop only:
```

```python
@ti.kernel
def test(a: ti.types.ndarray(), b: ti.types.ndarray()):  # assume a, b have the same shape
    H, W = a.shape[0], a.shape[1]

>     for i, j in ti.ndrange(H, W):  # one parallel for loop!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    for i, j in ti.ndrange(H, W):  # one parallel for loop
```

        if 0 < i < H - 1 and 0 < j < W - 1:
            b[i, j] = a[i, j] - (a[i-1, j] + a[i, j-1] + a[i+1, j] + a[i, j+1]) / 4
```

> This code is more readable than the NumPy version above, and runs way faster even on the CPU backend.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This code snippet is more readable than the NumPy version above and runs way faster even on the CPU backend.
```

Note that the elements in an external array must be indexed using a single square bracket. This contrasts with a Taichi vector or matrix field where field members and elements are indexed separately:

```python
x = ti.Vector.field(3, float, shape=(5, 5))
y = np.random.random((5, 5, 3))

@ti.kernel
def copy_vector(x: ti.template(), y: ti.types.ndarray()):
    for i, j in ti.ndrange(5, 5):
        for k in ti.static(range(3)):
            y[i, j, k] = x[i, j][k] # correct
            # y[i][j][k] = x[i, j][k] incorrect
            # y[i, j][k] = x[i, j][k] incorrect
```

> Also, external arrays in a Taichi kernel are indexed using its **physical memory layout**. For PyTorch users, this implies that the PyTorch tensor [needs to be made contiguous](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.Tensor.contiguous.html) before being passed into a Taichi kernel:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition, external arrays in a Taichi kernel are indexed using their **physical memory layout**. For PyTorch users, this means that a PyTorch tensor [needs to be made contiguous](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.Tensor.contiguous.html) before being passed into a Taichi kernel:
```

    ```python
    field = ti.Struct.field({'a': ti.i32, 'b': ti.types.vector(3, float)}, shape=(256, 512))
    field.shape # (256, 512)

    array_dict = field.to_numpy()
    array_dict.keys() # dict_keys(['a', 'b'])
    array_dict['a'].shape # (256, 512)
    array_dict['b'].shape # (256, 512, 3)

    field.from_numpy(array_dict) # the input array must have the same keys as the field
    ```

## Using external arrays as Taichi kernel arguments

You can use type hint `ti.types.ndarray()` to pass external arrays as kernel arguments. For example:

```python {10}
import taichi as ti
import numpy as np
ti.init()

a = np.zeros((5, 5))

@ti.kernel
def test(a: ti.types.ndarray()):
    for i in range(a.shape[0]):  # parallel for loop!
        for j in range(a.shape[1]):
            a[i, j] = i + j

test()
print(a)
```

The example above may be a bit simple and did not show the full advantange of using `ti.types.ndarray()`, we now give a more illustrative example:

> Assume we have two 2D arrays `a`, `b` of the same shape and dtype, for each cell `(i, j)` in `a`, we want to calculate the difference between the value of this cell with the average of its four neighboring cells, and store the result in the corresponding cell in `b`. This is called the *discrete Laplace operator* and can be denoted as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Assume that `a` and `b` are both 2D arrays of the same shape and dtype. For each cell `(i, j)` in `a`, we want to calculate the difference between its value and the average of its four neighboring cells while storing the result in the corresponding cell in `b`. This operation can be denoted as the *discrete Laplace operator*:
```

```
b[i, j] = a[i, j] - (a[i-1, j] + a[i, j-1] + a[i+1, j] + a[i, j+1]) / 4
```

> Such an operation is usually very slow even if you are using NumPy's vectorization tricks, for example you probably have seen something like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such an operation is usually very slow even with NumPy's vectorization, as the following code snippet shows:
```

```python
b[1:-1, 1:-1] += (               a[ :-2, 1:-1] +
                  a[1:-1, :-2]                 + a[1:-1, 2:] +
                                 a[2:  , 1:-1])
```

> But we can do this in Taichi just in one parallel `for` loop:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But Taichi allows us to meet the same purpose in one parallel `for` loop only:
```

```
b[i, j] = a[i, j] - (a[i-1, j] + a[i, j-1] + a[i+1, j] + a[i, j+1]) / 4
```

Such an operation is usually very slow even with NumPy's vectorization, as the following code snippet shows:

```python
b[1:-1, 1:-1] += (               a[ :-2, 1:-1] +
                  a[1:-1, :-2]                 + a[1:-1, 2:] +
                                 a[2:  , 1:-1])
```

But Taichi can meet the same purpose in one parallel `for` loop only:

```python
@ti.kernel
def test(a: ti.types.ndarray(), b: ti.types.ndarray()):  # assume a, b have the same shape
    H, W = a.shape[0], a.shape[1]
    for i, j in ti.ndrange(H, W):  # one parallel for loop
        if 0 < i < H - 1 and 0 < j < W - 1:
            b[i, j] = a[i, j] - (a[i-1, j] + a[i, j-1] + a[i+1, j] + a[i, j+1]) / 4
```

This code snippet is more readable than the NumPy version above and runs way faster even on the CPU backend.

> Note that the elements in an external array must be indexed using a single square bracket. This contrasts with a Taichi vector or matrix field where field members and elements are indexed separately:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the elements in an external array must be indexed using a single square bracket. This contrasts with a Taichi vector field or matrix field where field members and elements are indexed separately:
```
